everyone Laszlo Montgomery here part
three today of the John service history
podcast my plan was to sort of finish
off the topic today with the Dixie
mission and then for the rest of the
podcast just gloss over the next thirty
years of his life after service left yen
on on April 4th 1945 and headed back to
the USA for what turned out to be many
years of being tied to the whipping post
when I decided to cover the life of John
service it wasn't even sure if I could
fill a 30-minute episode and now here we
are in this longer than usual episode
117 and we're only going to get as far
as the end of 1944
I won't even finish the Dixie mission
today we've been looking at the life of
John's service as a kind of window into
the complicated world of us-china
relations in the late 1930s and 40s this
is the mean qua or nationalist period in
China there's no People's Republic yet
Jian kai-shek is the only ruler in China
that most American people have ever
known about as we begin today he hasn't
earned the moniker cash my check yet
dance for the next episode Jung had been
in power pretty much since sun yat-sen
left this world prematurely in 1925
almost two decades I'm using author Lin
joiners book honorable survivor Mao's
China McCarthy's America and the
persecution of John s service this came
out a few years ago and was put out
there by the Naval Institute press
I'm also drawing from one of my main
stalwarts Jonathan dispensed and his
work to change China Western advisors in
China and I was finally able to pull
Barbara Tuchman off the shelf and get a
few zingers from still well in the
American experience in China 1911 1945
besides these veritable fount of
information contained in my library if
you spend a little time on your favorite
search engine you'll find there is an
abundance a feast a plenitude of info
out there Documents galore
pretty much
Jon's service wrote that has been
Declassified you name it it's all out
there
everybody from FDR Truman young John
service John Paton Davies still well I
mean everyone will mention in this
series has left behind their own version
of events
Holden memoirs magazine articles letters
personal papers recorded phone
conversations secret communications
everybody's take on things from 1937 to
1945 is well documented for today's 21st
century curious as we begin part three
of the series here at the Royal China
history podcast will relive all the main
milestones of this historic melodrama
but if I did anything whatsoever to
pique your interest to dig deeper and
investigate the nitty gritty of these
times you could start with the three
sources I just gave you no need to thank
me a lot of people in America back in
the early 40s were attached to the
Generalissimo some especially so all the
soft power resources available at the
time fanned the flames of public opinion
in favor of the Nationalists especially
after the Japanese launched their
full-scale invasion in 1937 Jung had
always gotten excellent press in the US
and unyielding support from Franklin
Delano Roosevelt no one had been saying
anything negative about Chiang kai-shek
the nationalist government or about
their brutal struggle against the
invading Japanese until now 1944 now it
was beginning after so many years of
successfully holding back the tide Jang
was no longer able to bully or
sweet-talk his counterparts in DC
suddenly was gently being pushed aside
and then this brief love fest between
the Communists and yen unn and the
Americans of the Dixie mission will
begin so let's back up and review the
Wallis mission that we closed with last
episode John services role in this
mission
continued to be in his capacity as a
political officer attached the staff of
general Stilwell service had been
serving in the embassy in Chongqing
since 1941 are pretty much since even
before Japan bombed Pearl Harbor since
1943 though service have been loaned out
to Stilwell to serve as his political
adviser so he was under the umbrella of
the War Department rather than state he
is not a big guy in the service overall
in the State Department pecking order
his ranking was rather low to mid 'land
but this theme keeps repeating itself
time and again he's mr. nobody special
but there he is working face to face
with generals diplomats and all the main
cast of characters who all got Top
Billing in this slice of history he
rubbed elbows and dined regularly with
the likes of Mao Joe Judah yet yin yang
Lin Qiao John kai-shek Hong mei-ling
Stilwell Weda Mayer Wallace Hurley
everyone and then later on when he's
fighting for his life they'll be facing
off against one of the biggest bullies
and oaths in American history Senator
Joe McCarthy that's a lot of celebrities
in one lifetime in his role as an
adviser to Stilwell service in
cooperation with others produced a kind
of briefing paper for Wallace to read
before he met with Jim it was meant for
him to you know get a general idea of
the situation from informed people who
were on his same team and you know on
the ground there the entirety of John's
services contempt for the Nationalists
in general and for Jung in particular
used forth from this document that was
passed all over town everyone saw it a
lot of eyebrows were raised I assure you
the briefing was a scathing indictment
of Jang the Nationalists in America's
blind support for this regime without
any consideration of other options
although a lot of people had already
begun saying
the censors in Chongqing had always been
rather successful at filtering out most
of the negative stuff but this one got
out because it had too much shine on it
it had been written with the help of two
friends Jack service one was his
roommate Saul Adler who worked at
treasure aimless unbeknownst to service
also a Soviet spy the other was an
interesting chap who lived upstairs
named Cheech Hall Dean he was one of the
early and most effective communist
propagandists gee had insinuated himself
inside the American scene in Chongqing
Cheech helped ding pass down a lot of
tasty morsels to his people's opinion on
and his role during these Chongqing
years operating as a spy right under the
noses of these guys is a great untold
story one of the several up shots of the
Wallis mission was that Jung used the
occasion to bend the vp's air and just
dump all over still well in the
strongest possible terms he besieged
Wallis to do something to get rid of
this troublesome general and replace him
with someone else it would take John a
while to accomplish this objective but
he was persistent
so he began as campaign to get rid of
still well with this Wallis visit
furthermore and another move to dupe the
Americans who even at Wallace's level
couldn't have been more do pible John
requested that some sort of presidential
adviser be sent out who could work with
John to smooth out all these recent
political and diplomatic matters word
was getting out now into the American
public that more or less began with Ted
White's time article about the hood on
famine the more stuff that tried to get
out the greater the efforts were of
Jung's people to suppress everything
even mildly critical of the regime in
the songs new has spread money and charm
around Chongqing in Washington and they
had a well-oiled lobbying machine
working for them in the u.s. they were
very effective at making sure that
anything
negative that got past their sensors
wouldn't see the light of day in the
popular American press I'm sure plenty
of Americans on the receiving end were
happy to take all this nationalist money
to paint that portrait of them just
right this briefing by service called
written by Saul Adler and chee-chaw Bing
was sort of the firing on Fort Sumter I
guess you could say this was the opening
salvo and the bitter feud that erupted
between those who wanted to talk to the
Communists and those who felt the chai
calms were a wolf in sheep's clothing
and we shouldn't stray from our
long-standing position behind John
kai-shek and the Nationalists this
really was the first time someone had
actually come out with a megaphone and
said dump your KMT and cks shares
perhaps influenced by Jack's service
Henry Wallace told FDR in his report
that conditions in China were quote
extremely discouraging although he
passed on Young's request that Stilwell
be replaced Wallace also wrote that John
was a short-term investment who had
neither the intelligence nor the
political strength to run post-war China
Wallace also said quote the leader of
post-war China will be brought forward
by evolution or revolution and it now
seems more likely the latter he also
included in his report that the CCP and
KMT were at bitter odds with each other
and he saw a quote little chance of a
satisfactory long-term settlement chance
service and all like-minded China hands
of the time did their best to get these
visiting officials to snap out of their
hypnotized state Jennings supporters and
there was still quite a few had always
used their resources well to stoke the
fires of the wartime nationalist China
propaganda machine they had been amazing
at drowning out the voices of the jak
services and John Paton Davies and
others finally these china hands must
have thought someone listened to us and
opened their eyes and saw it for
themselves and no less a person from the
vice president of the united states
or was he yeah good old Washington
politics and young supporters made sure
Wallace's anti G young report never made
it to that famous desk made from the
Timbers of the HMS resolute that FDR sat
behind inside the Oval Office never got
that far
so Jung's secret was kept from Roosevelt
just a little bit longer as soon as
Wallace got back he was out and into his
shoes running as the new veep for FDR's
fourth term was gonna be harry s truman
so wallace was out and so was his
somewhat critical and i guess you could
say scathing report on his visit with
john kai-shek in a nice little bit of
research author lynn joiner mentions
that this wallace report got buried and
didn't see the light of day until the
McCarthy era began and all of Wallace's
most critical remarks in the report were
censored even this late in the game 1944
still not considered acceptable to say
anything that went counter to us-china
policy and in 1944 us-china policy was
very much still lined up behind the
nationalist government so before Henry
Wallace walks off into oblivion he gets
Jung to give the OK to sending this
American observer group to go check out
the chai calms up in yen on and this
group of course became known as the USA
OG the US Army observation group finally
Chairman Mao must have felt as he sat in
his cave and yen on official recognition
of his existence from the Americans
everything up until this moment had all
been under the table and unofficial
now this USA og had the chop of the
United States Army's stamped on it in
1944 and nobody knew this yet but Mao
was dying for US support and recognition
he wanted this like he wanted nothing
else that is outside of saving China and
building up the nation
again but he saw the US as the best
possible ally in 1944 he knew what the
US and his side and all that amazing
technology and know-how China could
bounce back in no time at all and best
of all old Joe Stalin to the north would
have to show some respect him back off
of miles turf so when Mao got word that
this observer group was coming he was
mighty happy but Mao at the same time
and Joe and I knew this too no matter
what the US and young were joined at the
hip and no amount of hoping or promising
or anything was gonna make the Americans
drop Jung in favor of the Communists Mao
knew what kind of a dirty word communism
was to America so he hoped but he was a
realist and didn't count on anything
he knew the way this thing between him
and John was gonna end up the USA is
gonna drop a rock on its foot right
about now you know when John was alone
with Wallace and he had his two closest
advisors with him namely his wife and
his brother-in-law he told Wallace hey
man you got to get rid of still well so
you know Wallace told John hey I'm on it
only no one listens to Wallace after he
gets back instead the department of war
remember the War Department was what
they call the Defense Department Truman
would change the name 1947 with the
National Security Act but the War
Department as was called back then led
by Henry Stimson decided and their
infinite wisdom not to get rid of
vinegar Jo as the Jimo insisted but
instead to put him in charge of the
whole army in China in other words
Chiang kai-shek would be working for
Stilwell how did such a thing happen fed
up with all the bad news he was hearing
FDR sent a message to Jung and said
plainly quote I recommend that you
charge Stilwell with full responsibility
and authority to stem the tide of the
enemy advances I feel that the case of
China is so desperate that if radical
and properly applied remedies are not
immediately affected our
and cause will suffer a disastrous
setback now of course FDR doesn't just
send an email to Jung because of the
communication technologies of the day
the message was sent by cable to the US
Embassy someone had to go deliver it the
highest-ranking person at the time was
General Benjamin Faris he was tasked to
bring the bad news to Jung and he asked
service to come with to do the
translation directly to the
Generalissimo rather than through one of
his handlers who might not give a
reliable translation so here's some
low-level guy like service who hates
giving the supreme leader what amounted
to a dressing down in front of his
assembled staff no less service said
later on this wasn't a good idea putting
Stilwell in charge of everything service
was back a week later in his same
capacity as a translator with a second
cable from Roosevelt where the president
turned up the heat and really leaned on
Jung to transfer power to Stilwell he
also assured Jung that he was searching
far and wide for a suitable personal
envoy that could act as that perfect
mediator between Jung and his general
who got under his skin so badly FDR was
really leaning on Jeon but there's only
two things on junk I scheck's mind one
is the matter of USA attitudes towards
the CCP and the other was control of the
lend-lease supply chain Jang and his
buddies were making a fortune siphoning
off lend-lease supplies it was also
critical to get as much as possible and
keep that powder dry for use against the
PLA on another day that everyone by now
Ichigo offensive or not knew was coming
soon by this time Japan was paying the
price of biting off more than it could
chew their empire so easily seized and
built up was starting to fray around the
edges but the Ichigo offensive was
proving quite effective
they were determined to consolidate
their hold in China by building a single
line of communication from the north to
the south from chin chin to Guangzhou
and then wiping out the American air
bases was critical before they could
finally
hammer the nationalists to capitulate it
was a dark hour for Japan in late 1944
but they weren't giving up and China
just yet
few weeks later as promised 50 our picks
the perfect mediator a guy with charm
and all the schmoozing skills necessary
to keep the Hatfields and McCoys in the
same bed too bad for everyone it was a
case of the old Chinese adage Tong chuan
among same bed different dreams based on
the shining recommendations of George
Marshall and secretary Stimson FDR
picked Patrick Hurley as his special
personal envoy Hurley we met from the
last episode he had served as Hoover's
Secretary of War he was an Oklahoma
Republican who good ol Roosevelt the
ultimate political animal thoughts made
a wise political choice to curry favor
with by giving him this very prestigious
job with the election year coming up
soon FDR had this in mind when he picked
this guy to bed it was an election year
so the army observer group it blasts off
into history on July 22nd 1944 the
initial group who led the charge and got
to hang out with all the CCP luminaries
included eight army guys five of whom
head OSS ties plus one diplomat John
service the top guy was Colonel David
Barrett another China expert who liked
Stilwell had served so many years in
China he was fluent in the language the
OSS was dying to know what value they
could extract from the Communists in
terms of intel on the enemy one of the
reasons they were so hot to establish
direct connections with the Communists
was to extricate themselves from die
Lee's spy network which included control
of Socko when these nine Americans
arrived in yen on the plane at a bit of
an accident due to the makeshift runway
and the aircraft was damaged on landing
not the best beginning Joe and Lai just
as he would with Nixon 28 years later
was waiting at the end of the plane
steps for the first members
of what became known as the Dixie
mission the CCP leaders really felt bad
about the damaged army plane and at once
the locals were organized to go fix that
runway and you know smooth it out a
little
even Mao himself put in the obligatory
few hours of symbolic liaodong to show
his Cheung Yee the Americans to picked
up a shovel and joined in as well the
next few weeks unfortunately were the
high point to the mission the second
wave of Americans came nine more most
with OSS ties and some like service had
a heavy China background one of the
Communist party's main mouthpieces the
liberation daily proclaimed in an
editorial on July 22nd that the arrival
of the Dixie mission was quote the most
exciting event ever since the war
against Japan started so right away
Barrett and service hold meetings with
Joe and Lai Judah and Bo and yet yin
yang as well these guys spoke Mandarin
so all that go Tong and jelly o with all
these leaders was nice and effective
they set forth the purpose of the
mission they were there for mainly five
things one to study the CCP's
effectiveness as a fighting force two to
gain intel on potential targets to
strike as well as the location of
landing strips three determine the
location of enemy forces four to set up
weather reporting stations and five to
develop joint plans for rescuing any
downed u.s. airman behind enemy lines in
north china and they emphasized over and
over they were just observers so don't
expect them to speak on behalf of
washington or cut any deals with them or
make any promises of material support at
the Welcome dinner held for the original
nine members of the mission Colonel
Barrett said on mouths left and Jack's
service set to the future great
helmsman's right and to the right of
service was Judah so he got to sit in
between Mao and Chu not bad and also
remember Chagny gonna China's greats
military hero future
hi mayor foreign minister Mao personally
officiated at this funeral when he
passed in 1972 when he met Jack service
and yen on he learned that services dad
Bob service was one of his teachers when
he attended the Chengdu YMCA a lot of
people of passed judgement on John s
service over the course of his life and
even into today some insist he was
nothing more than a stooge and a
traitorous cheerleader for the
Communists they say he was one of the
most effective pipelines of Communist
Party propaganda into the United States
anyways the reports coming out of yen on
from Jack's service in 1944 just
couldn't have been more positive and
glowing even JOHN CARTER Vinson
suggested to service that this all
looked too good to be true and surely he
was going a little too far in his
dispatches from yen on but there was
just too much evidence being found that
a lot of what the Communists claimed you
know as far as the amount of area they
controlled the popular support they
claimed to enjoy and their coming to the
rescue of US pilots shot down in North
China the more the Dixie mission members
did their due diligence the more they
found this wasn't just propaganda so
service stayed in yen on for about three
months and he just turned out one report
after another he went to all the famous
Saturday night dances where Mao would
establish his reputation as a man who
had an eye for the women Jiang Cheng was
already there and serviced hung out with
her too he was part of that whole scene
when everyone was so glad to be with
each other and the opportunities seemed
endless he died with John Chiang and Mao
on August 22nd he had spent eight hours
with Mao Zedong in his cave and service
took copious notes of the message that
Mao wanted to get out
Mao was ever the opportunist in his
efforts to deceive the Americans in
order to gain their trust and obtain an
advantage over his mortal enemies based
in Chongqing the reports that service
was compiling were quite calm
Centuri of the Communists his detractors
many years later would say you know
service was merely a dupe for the
Communists and was cleverly used by them
to get their deceitful message out so
the stage is set for her Lee's arrival
he arrives in early September via Moscow
and New Delhi he had met with Molotov
when he was in Russia that old Fox told
Hurley hey no way we'd support Mao you
know he ain't one of us
we don't want nothing to do with him and
his so-called communist so you know
Hurley took this to mean Soviet Union
was on the side of gem kai-shek that was
the first of many mistakes to follow you
know when JX service in the Dixie
mission landed in Yemen on July 22nd
you'd hardly know there were any
Russians there by no means at this early
stage for the CCP and the Soviets don't
steady yet there were a small handful of
Russians and yen on but right away you
could tell the Chinese up there were
totally in control there were no
Comintern or you know Russian agents
they are calling the shots it had been a
quarter century since Lee Dajjal first
told his fellow intellectuals in Beijing
to look at this guy Lenin and you know
what he was doing that was in June 1918
via the Comintern there was some early
influence on the Chinese Communists but
then came the Shanghai
massacre in 1927 followed by all the
aggression by the Soviets in Xinjiang
and Manchuria
by no means were the Chinese Communists
buddy-buddy with Russia in other words
in the summer of 1944 they were still
sitting on the fence and the USA had the
inside track as far as Mao Zedong was
concerned and he was the main decider in
yen on Jack's service and others saw
this and they were desperately trying to
get word out that these chai coms could
be had if we just play ball with them
the alternative is that they run into
the arms of the Soviets have a copy of a
Declassified report service wrote on
August 29 1944 it's entitled report
number 16 the
desirability of American military aid to
the Chinese communist armies the actual
documents you know yellowed with age is
available for you to see in PDF format
it's wild to see you know how far we've
come and you know the way we do things
now compared to 1944 it's just a
typewritten report written in the
old-fashioned style this report was
written to general Stilwell it lays out
services entire case as to why the
Communists should be supported and armed
by the US Army neat pulls no punches and
calls the nationalist leaders weak
incompetent uncooperative politically
blind thoroughly selfish and only
concerned with preserving their
tottering power I mean he really lays
into them he concludes by saying quote
consideration of all these political and
military factors I propose warrants the
extension of American military aid to
the Chinese Communist armies it was
signed John s service and approved her
transmission by Colonel David D Barrett
but Hurley had been assured by Molotov
don't worry about that happening so
Hurley thought he had an ace up his
sleeve but in fact he did that so
September 6 1944 services up in yen on
with the Dixie mission and Patrick J
Hurley personal envoy of the US
president is sitting in Chongqing with
John kai-shek and his magnificent wife
so mei-ling she figured Hurley out in
about a nanosecond as she began at once
to win him over to their side what is
there to say she was something you know
you know I read in Lin joiners book to
show you what an in compose as far as
you know having any understanding of
Chinese culture and traditions he
referred to madam Jang as Madame shek
good job FDR picking the right guy to
save the day between the US and China so
I guess you all know where this whole
story is going now the demand had
already been made for Jung to hand over
the reins of authority in the military
to Stilwell but he was stalling like
crazy
talks between Hurley Stillwell and John
were simply getting nowhere and the
truth was Jian kai-shek wasn't gonna
hand over command of the Chinese army to
Stilwell anymore then Xi Jinping would
hand over power of the CMC to Chuck
Hagel but Hurley was determined to crack
this nut and went back and forth to try
and cut a deal on September 13th 1944
Joe and Lai formally invites general
Stilwell and Patrick Hurley to come up
to Yin on and check the place out not
Jung starts to really lose it because
all this time going back to the late 30s
he had done so much to hold on to his
American backing and support and now at
the highest level they were beginning to
cavort with his most bitter rivals and
he couldn't stop it nothing had gone his
way from the start and now he felt he
was he was just gonna lose them he saw
how gullible and susceptible to Chinese
wiles they were and he just he just felt
desperate and beat so on the one hand
Hurley and Stilwell are pushing real
hard to get control of the Chinese war
machine and at the same time jion's
heels are dug in as far as they can go
because he resents it that they're gonna
go cavort with his enemies there is no
progress on this issue Stilwell and Jung
just couldn't get along and in fact
hated each other September 19 1944
another low point in the annals of
chung-kai sex personal history he gets a
cable from a frustrated and uninformed
Roosevelt that says quote I have urged
time and again in recent months that you
take drastic action to resist the
disaster which has been moving closer to
China and to you now when you have not
yet placed general Stilwell in command
of all forces in China we are faced with
the loss of a critical area in East
China with possible catastrophic
consequences I am certain that the only
thing you can now do in an attempt to
prevent the Japanese from achieving his
objectives in China is to reinforce your
Halloween armies in Burma and press
their offensive while at once
placing general Stilwell in unrestricted
command of all your forces how would you
feel if you were dignified head of state
and got an email like that
well what followed was a real barnburner
of a heated meeting Hurley who in short
order was already in Jung's and the
songs back pocket insisted this message
from FDR was way too strong and needed
to be toned down a little but still well
insisted they follow orders
this had to go from FDR to Jung direct
so they all meet and Stilwell hands the
letter to one of Jung's right-hand men
who starts to read this in Chinese and
still knows he's gonna rub the
Generalissimo nose and you know what so
he was surely gloating at you know
Jang's loss of face but Hurley
intervened and you know grabbed the
message out of the guy's hands just you
know passes it to Jong so that you know
he could read it privately instead of
you know out loud in front of everyone
well still well just couldn't resist and
at the peak of Jung's humiliation he
makes some quip like you know is that
official enough for you and remember you
know he knows how to speak Chinese
Barbara Tuchman put it well when she
said the tone of FDR's letter to Jeon
was quote rough and in substance it was
an invasion of sovereignty that denied
Roosevelt's own concept of China as a
great power and accepted Stilwell's view
of Jung as incapable of managing his
country's role in the war it called him
peanut by implication and all admirers
of vinegar Jo in the law associated with
him surely recall these eight lines
taken from his little poem to his wife
that night where he wrote I've waited
long for vengeance
at last I've had my chance I've looked
the peanut in the eye and kicked him in
the pants
I know I've still to suffer and run a
weary race but oh the Blessed pleasure
I've wrecked the peanuts face that was
it if Jung hated Stilwell before
now it was a fight to the death now it
was personal well it was already
personal but now it was serious John
pulled out all the stops and demanded -
Hurley that they get rid of Stillwell no
matter what he could not cooperate with
this guy so the anti Stillwell forces go
full throttle and before long Harry
Hopkins Henry Wallace Lachlan Korean of
course you know Hurley are all demanding
that still all be replaced Stillwell had
to go or John would go and if John goes
so goes China for the US meanwhile up in
yen on it's already October and word of
the epic battle between the Pro and anti
Stillwell forces makes its way up there
still had long been an advocate of using
the chai comms as a supplementary
military force and for guerrilla warfare
so now that it looked like he was on his
way out it really began to sour the yen
on spirit the folks in Chongqing had
just about had it with John service and
all his reports about how fantastic the
Communists were the Jong faction played
their strongest card well and that was
the control of Patrick Hurley's heart
and his mind October 22nd 1944 Stilwell
was shipped stateside he'd only have two
more years to live before stomach cancer
would cut his life short at the age of
Hurley had been convinced that this guy
John's service was a good-for-nothing
troublemaker in the back pocket of the
chai cons and needed to be kicked out of
China for good so his old childhood
friend from his boyhood Chengdu days
John Paton Davies is sent up to Yen on
two brief service and give him orders to
head back to the u.s. Stilwell's
dismissal may Jack service see red he
knew this had Jung's fingerprints all
over it
and in effect for the sake of placating
a foreign dictator we dismissed not only
one of our most able generals but a
four-star general at that
well Davies convinced Hurley to go check
out the chai comms for himself FDR
wasn't quite ready to
friend you know Chiang kai-shek but
let's say his enthusiasm for his staunch
ally had cooled considerably FDR was now
counting on Stalin to finish off Japan
once Germany was defeated he had given
up hoping that the nationalist army was
going to be able to do this the CBI
or china burma india theater was split
up so that china became an independent
theater of war general albert see what a
meyer was put in charge of Stilwell's
replacement so on October 23rd 1944 john
service headed back to the US before he
left however both service and davies had
sat with the big three in China Mao
Zedong Chou Enlai and Chu done had a
very long and frank conversation about
you know possible cooperation in the war
in George hey Tom and Edgar Snow they
were also present in yen on when the
Dixie mission was there you know doing
its thing but before service returns to
America he flies to Chongqing and
finally meets with Hurley you know who
treats him like a pariah right out of
the starting gate Hurley's mind had
already been made up for him by jung in
the songs so service just walked into a
buzzsaw he came in to tell Hurley he had
just met with mounted dong zhuo and ly
and trued uh the three most powerful
important and influential men up in yen
on you know in Harley just disses him
and says you know who needs to know all
that who cares what those guys think you
know so this meeting went nowhere
both mao and john were playing Harley to
be a fool manipulating his mind through
their proxies Hurley was still telling
FDR you know don't worry yeah a few
setbacks but I'll have them eating out
of the same rice ball in no time at all
so Hurley purposely chooses to remain
uninformed of the real situation and he
holds service and complete disdain and
with optimism that knew no bounds
Hurley remained convinced he could rely
on his human skills to break this
impasse John's service returned to the
US with a New York Times reporter named
Brooks
second son Atkinson was carrying a story
he wrote that was red-hot really put the
knife into Jian kai-shek in the whole
nationalist regime he in service left on
the same flight out of Chongqing they
flew over the hump to India then to the
Middle East and then to North Africa
where they were stranded in Tunisia the
service was able to get on the next
flight to New York ahead of Atkinson so
the reporter gave his story to service
who hand carried it to the offices of
the New York Times as soon as he landed
and found his way into Midtown this
little story that John's service hand
carried for Brooks Atkinson ran in the
New York Times on Halloween October 31st
1944 everything John's service had been
saying and more was contained in this
article it further accused the War
Department of firing Stilwell to placate
young and made a lot of hay about the
corruption involved with all the
lend-lease supplies Atkinson's article
said quote America is now committed at
least passively to supporting a regime
that has become increasingly unpopular
and distrusted in China that maintains
three secret police services and
concentration camps for political
prisoners that stifles free speech and
resists democratic forces
well at least Atkinson didn't call them
communists then that really would have
been too much there began a kind of
groundswell of outrage in the US and the
China Lobby in the u.s. who were you
know no slouches in these kinds of
situations for the sake of damage
control began to spin this yarn that all
of this was untrue and was merely
communist propaganda that john service
and John Paton Davies had been spreading
since the days they got to Chongqing
now people began to question US China
policy and John service was a very
popular and in-demand person for the
period of his stay in the US not long
after his arrival service met with
Lachlan curry and John Carter Vincent
encouraged him to get the word out and
speak to people who might be interested
to hear what he had to say
they tell service that they're gonna
send some big and influential people his
way and he should give them the honest
skinny on what was going on in China
among others service met with the head
of the China Lobby Henry Luce time-life
that meeting didn't go too well and Luce
basically shut service down and wouldn't
swallow anything about what was service
was saying services meeting with Harry
Hopkins went about as well service tried
to sell this close FDR friend and aide
about the merits of the Communists but
Hopkins would only tell service quote
very interesting I have no doubt that
the picture you give is largely correct
but the only Chinese that most Americans
have ever heard of is cks and those guys
call themselves communists Hopkins
couldn't have been more dismissive of
Mao as a person and CCP as a movement
he did ask service how petrichor Lee was
doing over there the service called him
quote a disaster and in the kmt's pocket
and that he was working against Stilwell
this is what service often ran up
against when dealing with the us-china
policy makers Roosevelt was ill and only
had a few more months to live this was
hardly the political climate where any
major changes were going to happen he
spoke at a place called the Institute
for Pacific relations the IPR this is
going to be important later on when the
whip comes down there at the IPR service
met an o ni office of naval intelligence
officer named Andrew Roth Roth is gonna
send a whole slew of China watchers john
services way and some of them service is
going to regret knowing later on
meanwhile back in china the day FDR was
reelected for a fourth term november 7th
1944 hurley landed in yen on he finally
was making the long-awaited visit he
flew up there with the little known but
we are
important person in ccp history linfu
han the ambassador clarence gauss had
already resigned but no replacement had
been picked yet when Hurley landed in
yen on Colonel David Barrett remembered
quote they were appeared at the top of
the steps a tall gray-haired soldierly
extremely handsome man wearing one of
the most beautifully tailored uniforms I
have ever seen and with enough ribbons
on his chest to represent every war
except possibly Shay's rebellion Barrett
had been waiting for Hurley at the
airstrip along with Joe and Lai the
future premier asked Colonel Barrett who
is that guy and once you saw what an
imposing figure
Hurley was and what a grand entrance he
was making he immediately ran and got
Mauro and mustered up an honor guard to
mark the occasion well in no time at all
Hurley had the Chinese completely
baffled with his indisputable ignorance
about the situation from his initial
conversations and small talk it became
apparent
Hurley knew nothing about the Communists
their tortuous relationship with the
Nationalists their short term and long
term goals
nothing nada in what Hurley believes is
a totally great deal he allows himself
to be talked into agreeing to these five
points one the Chinese government
Kuomintang and Communist Party should
cooperate with each other and unite all
their domestic military resources to
defeat Japan - the parties agree to
transform the Gorman Don government into
a coalition government and announced the
new three principles of the people three
the coalition government should support
sun yat-sen's theory and build up a
government of the people by the people
and for the people Yeah right
for the coalition government should
recognize all military who are against
the Japanese army and five the legal
status of all the parties should be
recognized this is on November 9 1944
Hurley and mial come to some you know
general understanding now bear it knows
is a totally bogus agreement no matter
what it is not gonna have Jung's
cooperation because he was
not gonna consider any power sharing
agreement the next day November 10th
early offers his you know
counterproposals and it went back and
forth you know like it always does and
Hurley made sure to load the document
with all kinds of you know flourishes
from the Constitution Bill of Rights and
FDR's greatest one-liners to Mao this
was a pretty good deal but he knew cks
was never gonna go for this no one
wanted to tell her Lee he was nuts
so Hurley in an uncontrollable wave of
self-importance tells Mao hey let's both
sign this memorandum to put a little bit
of the old gravitas into the document
then you know everyone pops the
champagne corks and Hurley thinks he
saved the day he was telling the people
back in DC that they just loved him up
here so he heads back to chun qiang and
he's convinced he's gonna take these
five points and get Chiang kai-shek's
nod of approval as soon as his plane
left Yunnan Mao and Joel must have
looked at each other and smiled at their
good luck Hurley had signed his name to
a document that was gonna bring them
into the mainstream but of course just
as everybody except Hurley knew John
rejected the five points Hurley
tried and tried but got nowhere and now
he knew he might have acted prematurely
with Mao regarding these five points
John took out two of the five points
these were the the two that dealt with a
coalition government and a national war
council then he did a little bit of this
and that and you know water this down
wouldn't commit to that and now Hurley
had to go back to Mao and sell him a
hamburger that didn't look like the one
in the advertisement and when Jung gave
Hurley his best offer he must have
thought if my own two dong agrees to
this he ought to have his head examined
and as all this is happening early as
assuring FDR that he's almost ready to
inked a deal
November 17th 1944 Patrick J Hurley is
officially made the replacement to the
departed ambassador Clarence Gauss he is
now ambassador Hurley and no longer just
a presidential envoy after Gauss had
seen what Hurley
- still well he threw in the towel he
just couldn't take it anymore
so Jung's latest counterproposal is
brought to Joe and live for a look-see
and of course you know Joe tells them to
go fly a kite
Hurley wet a mire bear it they all lean
hard on Joe to cave but there was no use
Joe and Colonel Barrett's flight again
on to meet with MAO this is where mile
gives it to him and says I thought we
had a deal with these five points this
was on December 8 so you know Barret
then goes back to Chongqing empty-handed
and everything's falling apart
Mao had actually said to bear that he
should leak these five points to the
press and show them the deal that he had
been promised and now the ambassador was
going back on his word well maybe he
never intended to do this but when Bear
had told this to Hurley from that point
on the chai comes run Patrick Hurley's
Haiming done and he refused to
accommodate them any further and he
jumps back into the arms of the Psalms
and junk Ishak he was failing in his
mission to bring the two opposing sides
together to cooperate in the war against
Japan not only were the two sides not
coming together they were now farther
apart than ever
John flat-out said no to everything and
Mao was in no hurry to negotiate because
they were now OSS people swarming all
over the place they're working
hand-in-hand with the Communists but
Hurley didn't know this Mao is still
insisting that Hurley stick with the
five-point proposal that they
painstakingly hammered out in yen on
when he visited and Hurley is
exasperated at mouse intransigence but
then out of nowhere comes a lightning
bolt a perfect excuse for Hurley to
explain the reasons for his failure to
achieve results one of general Weda
Meyers staff had sent you know Colonel
Barrett up to Yen on to work with Mao
and Judah about future OSS CCP
cooperation Dai Lee's spies find out
about this trip to Yen on by Barrett and
you know the topic of discussion and
they tell their boss you know hotels TV
Somme who tells Jang and then it's
it's a whole avalanche of outraged by
Hurley when TV song runs to the
ambassador saying what the hell's going
on and you know Pearlie claims ignorance
he starts by making enquiries and finds
out it was someone on wet a Meyer staff
acting without the General's orders who
allowed Barrett to go up there at such a
sensitive time when all this you know
deal-making was going on so now Hurley
starts screaming for the first time that
he was being undermined suddenly the
entirety of us-china policy becomes all
about Patrick Hurley's big ego than
about deciding on a course of action
heads ruled after this what am ia chief
of staff was fired John Paton Davies
also got slammed for his involvement and
was transferred out of China and poor
David Barrett was due for a promotion to
Brigadier General and Hurley had that
quashed TVs song and his coterie made
sure to whisper and Hurley's air but how
rotten these guys were all the time
undermining the ambassador's great
efforts they riled
Hurley up real nicely thanks to this
landmine another bit of blowback from
this incident came in the form of a
directive from Hurley saying that there
could be nothing said or transmitted
that was critical of John or the
nationalist party everyone had to
strictly obey the present American
policy that still had all its chips on
the Nationalists Hurley would you know
routinely share secret information with
the songs and Jack's people but he made
sure others on his own staff were kept
on a short leash resentment was really
brewing John service along with John
Paton Davies and John Carter Vincent
were the lone voices saying if we didn't
extend a hand to the Communists
then later on they'll end up in the arms
of the Soviets and that will tilt the
whole balance of power in Asia all those
who felt likewise were lined up against
Hurley this was a very poisonous
atmosphere down at the American Embassy
in Chongqing late
19:44 well I have seven more pages of
notes that were meant for this episode
and as you can see we are well into
stoppage time so now is actually a good
time to stop because we're about to pick
up in January of 1945 when our hero and
the subject of today's episode is gonna
fly back to Chongqing from the States
Hurley is on the rampage and not that
the cooperation was ever any good but
now it's a foregone conclusion civil war
looks inevitable not only between the
CCP and the KMT but between Hurley and a
lot of others too I want to conclude by
saying there are multiple sides to this
story perhaps because I'm mainly using
lead joiners book you know the viewpoint
I'm taking is more sympathetic to Jack's
service however there are also
historians and others who paint a nicer
portrait of her Lee Jung and Madame
Chiang you know Dai Lee and others
there's always at least you know two
sides to every story this period in the
early to mid 1940s when the future of
China was still being sorted out was one
filled with intrigue of the highest
order of spies and webs of deception
enough documents that were you know
constantly intercepted stolen and leaked
so I'm pretty sure now that the series
on the life of John s service not only
going to four episodes but almost
certainly to five I hope you're enjoying
not only about learning about the life
of John service but also of these
dramatic times in Chongqing and yen on
what a story this is Lazlo Montgomery
signing off once again and as usual from
the quintessential American town of
Claremont California population
something like 35,000 home of the
Claremont Colleges and the world-famous
Institute for postmodern development of
China yes all in our quaint little slice
of heaven here join us next week won't
you for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast